# The Chemometrician

Meanwhile in the late 1960s and early 1970s, another type of _metrics_ discipline was experiencing revolutionanzing changes in Scandinavian countries and Northern Europe. In this case, the field was not part of the social sciences scene but part of the life and natural sciences, concretely Chemistry. 

With the arrival of computers during the 1960s, and the increasing appearance of new electronic measurement devices, the field of Chemistry was irremediably touched by these technological changes. Consequently, a transition from "wet" chemistry to a more instrument based "electronic" chemistry gradually took place. One of the effects of having new electronic devices was the production of more data than what was commonly available before. So with the new instruments also came the need for analytical tools to crunch the raising tide of emerging data.

Traditional mathematical and statistical methods soon proved to be not enough for the new types of data. One of the main characteristics was the presence of many more variables than observations. Among the leading figures recognizing this change, and taking advantage of it, was Herman's son Svante Wold. Named after his grandfather Svante Arrhenius, the famous Swedish chemist---founder of electrochemistry, and Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 1903---Svante Wold also decided to follow Arrhenius's steps by studying Chemistry. He was also interested in computers, and he was a well versed programmer, sometimes helping his father implement various of his least squares-based algorithms.


#### The Born of Chemometrics

In 1971, Svante Wold, as a young professor at Umea University, Sweden, invented the word _chemometrics_ for a grant application. "Chemometrics, the art of extracting chemically relevant information from data produced in chemical experiments." Svante, however, was not the only one concerned about extracting relevant information from chemical data. In the early 1970s, a couple of publications about pattern recognition of chemical data by Bruce Kowalski and Bender appeared in the _Journal of the American Chemistal Society_. "I read and reread and reread the two articles on pattern recognition", Svante recalled. To him, those publications were more than simple papers, "they were a revelation." Svante quickly realized something equally important: "suddenly, I was not alone in my feelings about the state of chemistry." The same ideas of analyzing multidimensional chemical data, through the application of statistics and applied math, via computers, was shared by other chemists in the west coast of the USA. Svante "was thrilled" by all this situation.

Invited by the renowned American statistician George Box and Bill Hunter, Svante spent the academic year of 1973-1974 at the Statistics Department of the University of Wisconsin in Madison, Wisconsin. In mid-October 1973 Box asked Svante to go to the University of Arizona, in Tucson, for an Office of Naval Research symposium on chemistry and computers. Coincidently, in that meeting, the so much awaited moment by Svante became true. He finally had the opportunity to met the young chemist professor Bruce Kowalski, whose papers had deeply impacted him so much.

At the end of the symposium, Svante had the chance to talk to Bruce about their common interests. One of Bruce's initial questions to Wold was: "What are you doing?," to which Svante answered "chemometrics." Surprised by Wold's answer, Kowalski continued: "What is that?" Svante patiently explained the meaning of the term, asserting that it was basically the same thing Bruce was doing, but "much less advanced." The word "chemometrics" was precisely the term Kowalski was looking for. Positively impressed by the young Swedish chemometrician, Bruce invited Wold the following year (1974) to Seattle for a month to discuss what they were doing.

Between May and June 1974, Svante went to visit Bruce in Seattle. There, Wold had the opportunity to show his so-called "soft independent modeling of class analogy" method---most commonly known as SIMCA---for pattern recognition. Given the good performance of the method, it was decided to include it in ARTHUR, the package that Bruce and his research group were developing at the time.

Few disciplines can claim the exact day they were born. And Chemometrics is one of them. Just before Svante's returning to Umea, the group of Kowalski and Wold gathered on the evening of June 10, 1974, in a small Tex-Mex restaurant in Seattle. "After a number of Tequila shots", Wold recalled, "we decided to form _The Chemometrics Society_." (which soon became "The International Chemometrics Society"). 

----- 

The early interest of chemometrics were mainly about pattern recognition and classification. Borrowing techniques from statistics (like discriminant analysis), and other computational approaches for pattern recognition, the new chemometricians soon discovered that such approaches were limited. As Svante recognizes, "these approaches were still handicapped by the dogma that data had to have substantially more observations than variables." This forced analysts to devise their own dimension reduction approaches and new methods of pattern recognition. Then, more predictive problems were added to the table.

Actually, they were engaged in an intensive implementation of the interesting ideas produced by Svante’s father, Herman Wold, who was a famous statistician, developing many techniques (including the now famous method of the projection to latent structures – PLS) for data analysis in economic and social sciences."

One illuminating manuscript written by Svante is _"Chemometrics; what do we mean with it, and what do we want from it?"_ [@Wold1995]. In this paper, Svante provides us interesting reflections about Chemometrics (as seen in the mid-1990s).


#### The Born of PLS Regression

Wold (2001) [@Wold2001] "The concept of latent variable as the 'the real thing' driving complicated processes appealed to me as it is very similar to the 'effects' we have in organic chemistry---inductive, lipophilic, steric, etc.---and I hence was greatly attracted by the PLS philosophy. However, the implementation impressed me less, and in the beginning I considered Herman's PLS as very prone to over-fitting because of the many variables, and hence I did not take it very seriously. Herman's enthusiasm and patient explanations of how latent variables (being estimated as weighted averages of the original, manifest variables) stabilized the situation, slowly convinced me that this was a well working approach with great potential also in the natural sciences and in engineering.

Also from [@Wold2001]: At the beginning of the 1980s, Svante [@Wold2001] "started to work with the simplest PLS model (two blocks) and realized that it could be looked on as a regression model in latent variables with a simple geometrical interpretation. This made me enormously happy and I started to simulate what happened with many variables and of course found that Herman was correct; many X-variables could be dealt with no or just little over-fit (provided cross-validation is used to keep the number of model components in check)."

About 1979 or 1980, Svante met Harald Martens in Oslo, and "after a while he managed to convince Martens that PLS would be much better for his multivariate calibration problems (they were not yet called that). We started to apply Herman's 2-block PLS mode A, B, and C to our data and had a big scientific crisis---it did not work beyond the first component. Harald and I worked out different solutions to the problem. Here I had great help of Axel Ruhe who was then professor of numerical analysis in Umea, later in Gothenburg. Harald and I talked on the phone for hours everyday between our programming (in Basic for 8-bit CPM computers), and when we gradually got things to work and discovered the fantastic properties of the 2-block PLS approach, we had a wonderful time. I think we both agree that these years between 1981 and 1984 were among the happiest (scientifically) in our professional lives.

I presented my version of PLS including "PLS-2" with many y-variables at a conference on Data Analysis in Food Research arranged outside Oslo in 1982 by Harald and his boss Russwurm. Then, Herman, Harald and I jointly published the first papers on PLS and multivariate calibration in 1983, the analytical chemistry community was informed soon after.

-----


Faced with data challenges in the chemical industry, Svante Wold and colleagues had been working on new ways to analyze such data. The type of data was characterized by a large number of variables, sometimes few observations, high collinearity. One of the typical problems was that of _Calibration_, which consists of using regression methods for prediction purposes.

Like Herman Wold in econometrics, his son Svante Wold became also a pioneer and leading figure in his field of expertise: Chemometrics. Unlike his father, Svante's trajectory would take a different path. In the 1970s Svante had worked on pattern recognition problems, making use of principal components for discrimination analysis approaches. 

In the 1970?s Svante had met Norwegian chemist Harald Martens. Harald Martens and Svante Wold had also been working on regression problems. They were using PCR but it wasn't always perfect. Svante asked his father for some help. Herman adviced Svante to use his PLS methods. After a couple of attempts Svante applied the PLS-PM for two blocks but he didn't achieved much. Something was not working, but what? Svante called Harald and shared the procedures. After a couple of hours Harald realized that the problem had to do with the way the latent variables were obtained. He did some modifications and then hey obtained satisfying results. Formalizing the procudere, Svante et al (1983) proposed a technique for regression analysis based on Partial Least Squares in 1983. Improved and modified during the middle 1980s, slightly different versions of the PLS regression were developed by Svante and colleagues such as Harold Martens and Tormod Naes. This regression method started to show very practical, useful and valuable. In an industry where there was a need for analytical tools capable of dealing with multicollinearity, missing values, and large data sets, PLS Regression fulfilled all those needs.

Svante Wold and colleagues adapted and reshaped Herman's ideas. Stripping away the more theoretical issues, they focused more on the practical issues, and computational aspects. Their motivation was more pragmatic and driven by the type of data challenges they were dealing with. While Herman Wold's developments were always framed within an econometrics model-building tradition, and looked at through the philosophy science glass, S-Wold and his collaborators was more industry influenced. There was not much room for philosophical considerations and causality considerations. 

By the early 1990s, PLS Regression was skyrocketing. Svante Wold was promoting it within Chemical industries. Not only that, Tormod Naes and Harold Martens were also among the prolific authors, proposing adaptations. Software was not issue, there was SIMCA-P (now Umetrics) and Unscrambler. SAS would later add its PLS-R procedure. Consequently, it soon attracted the attention of other experts in the field, expanding to oil industry, food science, cosmetics, and other related subfields of Chemistry. Because os its very pragmatic nature, PLS regression methods didn't have an optimization criterion. They were more in the spirit of computational methods: simple to implement, relatively fast.

In 1992, French practitioners and researchers started to have their first contact with the PLS regression methods. Among the consulting activities of S-Wold, he was difussing his methods and software around the European Chemical Industry. In France, he consulted for L'Oreal introducing his methods. Before long other companies were catching up with this method. One of those companies was Rhone-Poulenc. At that time, the head of the data analysis research department, Jean-Pierre Gauchy asked statistician and professor Michel Tenenhaus to explain the PLS methods and train his researchers. Michel, a french professor in business school and also a consultant for industry, accepted the request of Jean-Pierre and started to study the regression via PLS.

With a long tradition of Multidmensional Analysis Methods, French data analysts had their preferences for favoring their school and tools---just like other geographic regions like Scandinavians, Dutch, or Anglo-Saxons. Rooted in the seminal work of Jean-Paul Benzecri, data analysis _alla Française_ privileged data with a decisive inclination to exploratory and descriptive approaches. With a heavy use of geometry, algebra, their methods favored projection methods (PCA, CA, MCA, Hierarchical Clustering Analysis, etc). Till these days, most formation that requires a formation in quantitative-analytical methods for data analysis, will include some syllabus based on these methods. Part of the limited difusion was the strong tradition of French pride to write and publish in French. This trend has had both positive and negative effects. On the positive side it has allowed a strong development in France and french-speaking communities. On the negative side, it has limited the spread. Another limitation was the lack of more explanatory and causal modeling techniques that matched the geometric spirit without privileging inferential statistics on rather hard to meet assumptions of real data.

The PLS Regression of scandinavian chemetricians was the perfect match to French _Analyse des Données_: both favoring the same core concepts of projections, inductive style, interpretable tools, and graphical displays. To Michel Tenenhaus this was a revelation and he was immediately caught up studying and researching PLS Regression, and he started to prepare a book on that topic. "During the writing of this book, I had many interrogations on many points" Michel remembers. Invited by Svante Wold, Michel spent some time in Sweden to discuss various issues. Michel asked a number of questions about PLS which Svante answered and clarified. But not all them, "some formula in SIMCA-P are still secret!" Michel admits. Among the copious bibliographic sources Svante gave Michel, there was a green hardcover book that Svante's father, jointly with Karl Jöreskog, edited in 1982: _Systems Under Indirect Observation_, one of the classical references about the PLS framework of Herman Wold.

Being a professor in the Business School HEC, Michel asked for PLS applications in management. But Svante didn't have much material around management or business applications, so he referred Michel to Swedish professor and consultant Clases Fornell, Business and Management professor at University of Michigan, and also an expert in Customer Satisfaction Measurement.
