# The Renaissance of Herman's PLS

The PLS Regression of scandinavian chemetricians was the perfect match to French _Analyse des Données_: both favoring the same core concepts of projections, inductive style, interpretable tools, and graphical displays. With a long tradition of Multidmensional Analysis Methods, French data analysts have had their preferences for favoring their school and tools with a heavy use of geometry, algebra, and projection methods. Rooted in the seminal work of Jean-Paul Benzecri during the mid-1960s, data analysis _alla Française_ privileged data analysis with a decisive inclination to exploratory and descriptive approaches---similar to the spirit of John Tuckey's _Exploratory Data Analysis_ (EDA). One limitation of the French vision, however, was the lack of more explanatory and causal modeling techniques that matched the geometric spirit without privileging inferential statistics on rather hard to meet assumptions of real data (like the "soft modeling" ideals of Herman Wold). 

PLS Regression was a revelation to Michel Tenenhaus, and he was immediately caught up studying and researching the method. Soon after, he started to prepare a book on that topic. "During the writing of this book,", Michel remembers, "I had many interrogations on many points." Invited by Svante Wold, Michel spent some time in Sweden to discuss various issues. Michel asked a number of questions about PLS which Svante answered and clarified. But not all them, "some formula in SIMCA-P are still secret!" Michel admits. Among the copious bibliographic sources Svante gave Michel, there was a green hardcover book that Svante's father, jointly with Karl Jöreskog, edited in 1982: _Systems Under Indirect Observation_, now considered one of the classical references about the PLS framework of Herman Wold.

Being a professor in the prestigious Business School HEC, Michel asked Sante about PLS applications in management. But Svante didn't have much material around management or business applications, so he referred Michel to Swedish professor and consultant Clases Fornell, Business and Management professor at University of Michigan, and also an expert in Customer Satisfaction Measurement.


## Customer Satisfaction

Claes Fornell had been introduced to PLS around the end 1970s / early 1980s by American Professor and morphometrician Fred Bookstein, while both were teaching at the University of Michigan. In turn, Fred Bookstein was an expert in morphometrics who had had the opportunity to learn about Herman Wold's methods and even collaborate with him. In fact, a couple of geometrical interpretations of PLS-PM were provided by Bookstein (1980, 1982). Among one of the most cited PLS papers on marketing applications is the 1982 article "Exit Voice", written by both Fornell and Bookstein in the Journal of Marketing Research. Claes found PLS very interesting and convenient. He even edited a two volume book published under the title _A Second Generation of Multivariate Analysis_ [@Fornell1982]. And he also taught those methods to students in the Business PhD Program at Michigan University.

Claes Fornell used the PLS Path Modeling approach for Customer Satisfaction, and he, like Svante, used it not only for academic research but also for consulting purposes. In this case, the method was employed by the firm _Claes Fornell Group_ (CFG). The main application of PLS-PM by Claes Fornell was on Customer Satisfaction. Among his entrepeneurial research projects he developed the _Swedish Customer Satisfaction Barometer_ in 1989. And then he started the project for developing the _American Customer Satisfaction Index_ (ACSI) in 1994. 

Michel Tenenhaus traveled to Michigan to meet with Claes Fornell who talked to him and presented him PLS applications in management. Claes showed Michel applications in Customer Satisfaction and talked about the PLS algorithm. But something didn't click with Tenenhaus. Although Fornell was talking about Partial Least Squares, his version was not exactly the one used by the chemometricians. There was obviously something that Michel didn't quite get. After all the studying of PLS regression, he was totally disconcerned. According to Michel this was "a very unpleasant situation". Had Svante forgortten to mention something else? Was Michel missing something else?

There was clearly something wrong. Under the same term "Partial Least Squares," the version of the chemometricians was not at all the same version Claes Fornell had shown Michel. Strangely though, since both methods had the PLS label and _Wold_ was the last name of the main author for both versions. Where did Tenenhaus's confusion come from?


## American Influence

Jointly with Claes Fornell, there was another leading expert of PLS-PM who was part of the very reduced group of researchers making intensive use of the PLS approach: Wynne Chin, American professor of Decision and Information Science.

In the early 1990s, Chin found himself in the middle of a crossroad. On its way to becoming a leading figure in the research field of _Management Information Systems_ (MIS), Wynne Chin had also been developing a software program that he called _PLS-Graph_, named after the little known---at the time---data modeling approach under of Partial Least Squares. 

Basically, research on the field of _Management Information Systems_ is concerned with the problems related around management and usage of information technology and information systems: the use of Information Technology systems, how they are developed, used, and applied in organizations and industries. Among the quantitative tools for studying these problems, MIS researchers use a set of data modeling methods better known under the umbrella term of _Structural Equation Models_. Historically, this type of models have been borrowed, used and adopted from other disciplines, mainly from social and behavorial sciences rooted in psychometrics and causal modeling literature.

In his early 30s, Chin was in that singular spot that makes someone being a skilled master of some unique tradition, and at the same time being one of the few possessors of such knowledge. It looked like if Wynne was in a privileged power play position... except for the fact that almost no one else seemed to care much about that PLS methodology. Trained in biophysics and chemical engineering, Wynne Chin was enrolled to the MBA program at the University of Michigan in 1980, and then he continued with a PhD in Computers and Information Systems. He got his first contact with PLS-PM from the seminars taught by Claes Fornell. But more important, Chin intermittently worked over a period of ten years developing a series of computer programs that eventually would led to the final version of his _PLS-Graph_ software. In the early 1980s he helped with the programming for a version on the then still in use main frame computers. Shortly after the introduction of the first IBM PCs, he also started to develop a version for MS-DOS.

Wynne Chin considerably helped spread PLS-PM among MIS researchers, and he even released for free his PLS-Graph, under the condition that it would only be used for academica purposes, and that it wouldn't be extended or developed wihtout his approval---something that didn't happened. Although the development of PLS-Graph has considerably slowed down, at the time of this writing, it is still available previous contact with Wynne Chin.

Previous to Chin's software there were already available computer programs such as _LVPLS_ by Jan-Bernd Lohmöller, at the time considered the most complete software for PLS. None of the available software were commercial versions but academic ones for research-purpose distributed at nominal charge. This short supply of PLS software was a substantial difference compared to the software available for covariance-based Structural Equation Models. By that time the most popular software was _LISREL_, developed by Karl Jöreskog and Dag Sörbom. At the end the 1980s _LISREL_ was already in its version VI with its _microcomputer_ PC-based program _LISREL-PC_. Version 7 was launched in 1989 integrated within the larger software _SPSS_, and it already had a graphic interface intended to make it ease for users.

Since none of the PLS versions had a graphical interface, Wynne Chin started to work on a version consistent with Lohmöller's PC version around 1987. It was working on Windows 2.0 back then. But finally reliable for Windows 3.0, mainly for his own use. According to Wynne, the first official presentation of his software was in 1988. The so-called PLS approach remained largely unknown eclipsed by the more commercially successful _LISREL_, widely available and converted in the _gold-standard_ for SEM at that time. The PLS method was so unique that it suffered from a lack of interest in the best of the cases, and from multiple misundertandings in most occasions. 

The first half of the 1990s decade also coincided with the passing away of Jan-Bernd Lohmöller, and Herman Wold---the intellectual force and founding father of PLS. "At that point, it was clear no one else was supporting the use of PLS," Chin recalled. Watching how the method was fading away at an alarming rate, Chin made what he believed was the most appropriate decision at that time. As a last resort to keep alive the PLS approach among his colleagues, he decided to share _PLS-Graph_ within the MIS community where he kept it "officially free for academic research" purposes. 

Previous to Chin's software there were already available computer programs from other PLS developers. B.S. Hui, Svante Wold, and Jan-Bernd Lohmöller. Perhaps the most complete version was that of Lohmöller. These were not commercial versions but academic research-purpose distributed at nominal charge. Users sent requests by mail and in return got the discs for installation.


## The Path Modeling Renaissance

The Customer Satisfaction movement of the late 1990s inspired European members to proposed a similar alternative of ACSI adapted to the European geography. A consortium of universities and researchers was formed and the ESIS projects was born with the goal, among other purposes, to develop PLS-PM software. This also sparked a fire of interest for PLS-PM, with revival and difussion. In 1999 Michel Tenenhaus and Alain Morineau organized an International Symposium on PLS methods. It was then decided to be continued by Vincenzo Esposito Vinzi and Carlo Lauro.

On the theoretical side, PLS methods have attracted a lot of attention from many researchers. A line of research has to do with how other Multivariate Methods are related with the PLS framework. 

Thanks to the work and collaboration of many researchers, Herman's methodology has seen the light again.