# The Eclipse of Herman's PLS

At the time of Herman's retirement---which were also his last years---the body of knowledge about Partial Least Squares had grown considerably. By 1989, three years before his passing away, Herman had produced around 20 publications, as well as a couple of dozens reports and working papers about NIPALS and PLS methods. Also in 1989 the book _Latent Variable Path Modeling with Partial Least Squares_ by Jan-Bernd Lohmöller was published, and the software LVPLS was available. PLS, in its Path Modeling version, was already ripen, and it seemed to be a matter of time before taking off. 

PLS did take off, but not in the father's version, but in the son's regression framework. At age 83, Herman passed away on February 16th, 1992 in Stockholm. He had left a tremendous legacy, and he had already passed the torch to various of his students and collaborators. Unfortunately, the most promising figure, Lohmöller, also died in the early 1990s. Orphan and abondoned to its own luck the PLS soft modeling on path models with latent variables started a slow but constantly decline. PLSPM was irremediably eclipsed by PLS Regression.


## Customer Satisfaction

Claes Fornell had been introduced to PLS around the end 1970s / early 1980s by American morphometrician and professor Fred Bookstein, while both were teaching at the University of Michigan. Perhaps one of the most cited PLS papers on marketing applications is the 1982 article "Exit Voice", written by both Fornell and Bookstein in the Journal of Marketing Research.

Claes found PLS very interesting and convenient. He even edited a work published under the title A Second Generation of Multivariate Methods (Fornell, 1985). And he taught those methods to students in the Business PhD Program at Michigan University.

Claes Fornell used PLS approach for Customer Satisfaction, and he, like Svante, used it not only for academic research but also for consulting purposes. In this case, the method was employed by the firm _Claes Fornell Group_ (CFG). The main application of PLS by Claes Fornell was on Customer Satisfaction. Among his entrepeneurial research projects he developed the Swedish Customer Satisfaction Barometer in 1989. And then he started the project for developing the American Customer Satisfaction Index (ACSI) in 1994. 

Michel traveled to Michigan to meet with Claes Fornell who talked to him and presented him PLS applications in management. Claes showed Michel applications in Customer Satisfaction and talked about the PLS algorithm. But something didn't click with Tenenhaus. Although Fornell was talking about Partial Least Squares, his version was not exactly the one used by chemometricians, or at least there was something that Michel didn't get. After all the studying of PLS regression, he was totally disconcerned. According to Michel this was "a very unpleasant situation". Had Svante forgortten to mention something else? Was Michel missing something else?

There was clearly something wrong. Under the same term Partial Least Squares, the version of the chemometricians was not at all the same version Claes Fornell had shown Michel. Strangely though, since both methods had the PLS label and _Wold_ was the last name of the main author for both versions. Where did Tenenhaus's confusion come from?


Claes Fornell got introduced to PLS-PM by Fred Bookstein, an expert in morphometrics who had had the opportunity to learn about Herman Wold's methods and even collaborate with him. A couple of geometrical interpretations of PLS-PM are found Bookstein (1980, 1982). Perhaps more famous a widely known is the paper by Fornell and Bookstein (1982) in the Journal of Marketing Research comparing PLS against LISREL. Bookstein has developed in own PLS version, more about SVD, morphometrics.

In 1980, Wynne Chin was enrolled to his MBA in Michigan, where he took a seminar with Claes Fornell. Fornell kept applying PLS-PM on his customer satisfaction studies, and even for his entrepeneurial and consulting projects with the Swedish Consumer Satisfaction Barometer, that would be the base for the American Customer Satisfaction Index (ACSI).

Wynne Chin spread PLS among MIS researchers, and he even released for free his PLS-Graph, under the condition that it would only be used for academica purposes, and that it wouldn't be extended of developed wihtout his approval---something that didn't happened. Although its development has considerably slowed down, to the time of this writing, PLS-Graph is still available previous contact with Wynne Chin.

The Customer Satisfaction movement of the late 1990s inspired European members to proposed a similar alternative of ACSI adapted to the European geography. A consortium of universities and researchers was formed and the ESIS projects was born with the goal, among other purposes, to develop PLS-PM software. This also sparked a fire of interest for PLS-PM, with revival and difussion. In 1999 Michel Tenenhaus and Alain Morineau organized an International Symposium on PLS methods. It was then decided to be continued by Vincenzo Esposito Vinzi and Carlo Lauro.

On the theoretical side, PLS methods have attracted a lot of attention from many researchers. A line of research has to do with how other Multivariate Methods are related with the PLS framework. Especially 


## American Influence

In the early 1990s, an American professor of Decision and Information Science found himself in the middle of a crossroad. On its way to becoming a leading figure in the research field of _Management Information Systems_ (MIS), Wynne Chin had also been developing a software program that he called _PLS-Graph_, named after a little known data modeling approach under, by then, the enigmatic name of Partial Least Squares. In his early 30s, Chin was in that singular spot that makes someone being a skilled master of some unique tradition, and at the same time being one of the few possessors of such knowledge. It looked like if Wynne was in a privileged power play position... except for the fact that almost no one else seemed to care much about that PLS stuff.

Basically, research on the field of _Management Information Systems_ is concerned with the problems related around management and usage of information technology and information systems: the use of Information Technology systems, how they are developed, used, and applied in organizations and industries. Among the quantitative tools for studying these problems, MIS researchers use a set of data modeling methods better known under the umbrella term of _Structural Equation Models_. Historically, this type of models have been borrowed, used and adopted from other disciplines, mainly from social and behavorial sciences rooted in psychometrics and causal modeling literature. The most popular of the so-called Structural Equation Modeling techniques is based on approaches that focus on analyzing the Covariance Structure of the data, therefore referred to as Covariance Structure Analysis. But there are other alternative approaches like the one provided by Partial Least Squares.

Wynne Chin was among a very reduced group of researchers who were making intensive use of the PLS approach. Trained in biophysics and chemical engineering, and with a PhD in Computers and Information Systems (from the University of Michigan) Wynne Chin intermittently worked over a period of ten years developing a series of computer programs that eventually would led to the final version of his _PLS-Graph_. In the early 1980s he helped with the programming for a version on the then still in use main frame computers. Shortly after the introduction of the first IBM PCs, he also started to develop a version for MS-DOS. His software was not the only one. 

Previous to Chin's software there were already available computer programs such as _LVPLS_ by Jan-Bernd Lohmöller, at the time considered the most complete software for PLS. None of the available software were commercial versions but academic ones for research-purpose distributed at nominal charge. This short supply of PLS software was a substantial difference compared to the software available for covariance-based Structural Equation Models. By that time the most popular software was _LISREL_, developed by Karl Jöreskog and Dag Sörbom. At the end the 1980s _LISREL_ was already in its version VI with its _microcomputer_ PC-based program _LISREL-PC_. Version 7 was launched in 1989 integrated within the larger software _SPSS_, and it already had a graphic interface intended to make it ease for users.

Since none of the PLS versions had a graphical interface, Wynne Chin started to work on a version consistent with Lohmöller's PC version around 1987. It was working on Windows 2.0 back then. But finally reliable for Windows 3.0, mainly for his own use. According to Wynne, the first official presentation of his software was in 1988. The so-called PLS approach remained largely unknown eclipsed by the more commercially successful _LISREL_, widely available and converted in the _gold-standard_ for SEM at that time. The PLS method was so unique that it suffered from a lack of interest in the best of the cases, and from multiple misundertandings in most occasions. 

The first half of the 1990s decade also coincided with the passing away of Jan-Bernd Lohmöller, and Herman Wold---the intellectual force and founding father of PLS. "At that point, it was clear no one else was supporting the use of PLS," Chin recalled. Watching how the method was fading away at an alarming rate, Chin made what he believed was the most appropriate decision at that time. As a last resort to keep alive the PLS approach among his colleagues, he decided to share _PLS-Graph_ within the MIS community where he kept it "officially free for academic research" purposes. 

Previous to Chin's software there were already available computer programs from other PLS developers. B.S. Hui, Svante Wold, and Jan-Bernd Lohmöller. Perhaps the most complete version was that of Lohmöller. These were not commercial versions but academic research-purpose distributed at nominal charge. Users sent requests by mail and in return got the discs for installation.


## The Path Modeling Renaissance

Thanks to the work and collaboration of many researchers, Herman's methodology has seen the light again.